Screen Space Shadows
Graham Aldridge
R&D Lead, Sony Bend Studio
graham.aldridge@sony.com

Today

I’ll be talking about Screen Space Shadows

A high-level implementation overview
How they are implemented in a number of Sony titles

Super Quick:
What are Screen Space
Shadows?
(Sometimes called Contact Shadows)

• Like SSAO, we start with a Depth Texture
• Somehow extract micro-shadow detail from this Depth
Texture
• Use this shadow as a complement to traditional shadow
rendering

Motivation

Why would we want to use Screen Space Shadows?

I’ll also be describing a simple technique that can utilize Screen Space Shadows …

To transform in-game materials from something quite flat, to something far more compelling …

Not just adding micro shadow detail, they can also greatly improve distant shadow detail …

The majority of distant tree shadows here are screen space shadows.

Without them, the scene looks much flatter and less detailed

Zooming in demonstrates how screen
space shadows can complement
shadow maps,
Capturing small details that would be
exceedingly difficult to capture with
traditional, non-ray traced methods.

How-to:
Casting Shadows in Screen
Space
Let’s cover the basics first:
How to cast a ray in screen space

World Space:

Screen Space:

Standard Projection

To cast a shadow, we linearly interpolate from
arbitrary points in space towards the light source
(shadow ray).
Interpolating towards the light source in projected 2D
coordinates (Screen Space) will also form a straight
line.
Values written to the depth buffer use the same projection as
2D screen coordinates.
Meaning that values in the depth buffer also interpolate
linearly along a screen space ray, just like the 2D coordinates do.
Consider what happens when the Light moves offscreen
Shadow rays interpolating towards the light’s
projected 2D coordinate still form a straight line,
even when the light is offscreen.
As the light approaches the camera plane (w = 0),
the 2D coordinates will approach +/- infinity.
Because the 2D coordinate is very large, the screen
space rays become highly parallel.
As the light crosses the camera plane, w becomes negative.
The projected coordinate flips and the now reappears on the
opposite side of the screen. We have to account for this:
When w is negative, screen space rays now diverge from the
projected 2D coordinate, rather than converging towards it.

Knowing how to sample,
Shadowing becomes quite
simple
Here’s an example of how to compute a shadow

Screen Space

Depth Buffer Values

• Given a starting pixel:

• We want to find sample locations using the projected light
coordinate
•
•

•

Projected Light
Coordinate is far offscreen
(Very large
sample count)

In this case, the Light Coordinate is far offscreen

In 2D screen space and Depth, linearly interpolate towards the projected light coordinate

Or if the light’s w value was negative, then interpolate away from that coordinate

• Read the depth buffer at interpolated sample locations
•

•

Perform some kind of comparison between your interpolated depth, and sampled depth

Generate a shadow term from these comparisons (e.g., make assumptions about
sample ‘thickness’)

• However, a number of problems arise
• Disocclusion artefacts can be quite significant

• This is a fundamental limitation of Screen Space Shadows
• This is why they cannot replace shadow maps, only complement them

• Also problematic is under-sampling and depth buffer aliasing
• To avoid projecting aliasing, individual samples should not fully shadow

• The technique needs lots of samples

• Either brute-force it, or do something complicated?

Limited sample count

It’s
If we
tempting
sample to
every
think
pixel,
a starting
do anybias
problems
may fixoccur?
this,
but in practice it didn’t work all that well – and
suppressed legitimate detail
Given a starting pixel we want to shadow,
Consider the following light direction
Our solution was more complicated:
For every sample, perform a manual bilinear filter –
with
a threshold
test
to detect
legitimate
edges
It quickly
becomes
apparent
that
sampling
every
pixel causes significant aliasing
This jump could represent a dramatic change in
depth

Here is an example of the artefacts
Zooming in, they can get quite severe
And here is with the manual, edge-aware bilinear
filter

So,
This all seems a little
expensive?
It is, until a key observation is made…

Returning to the single pixel example:
Things get interesting if we consider the neighbour
pixel
The two rays are very similar – targeting the same
point

If we are willing to shift the ray origin within the pixel,
the rays can be made to align perfectly in 2D Screen
Space
This means that these neighbours can now potentially
share their samples (e.g., through LDS/groupshared)
The next step is to extrapolate

How to map samples to GPU compute wavefronts?
Rather than using a traditional 8x8x1 wavefront
Samples are instead mapped to one-dimensional
64x1x1 wavefronts, where all threads correspond
to the same ray
Each thread performs one bilinear edge detect and
blend, storing the result in LDS
Each thread also reads and stores at least one
extended sample, based on the desired shadow
sample count
Once stored, it’s then a matter of iterating the
samples

Returning to the depth buffer example:
Plotting out some sample directions, all rays can be
seen converging to the same point
Therefor, a simple division transform of the stored
data can have all rays become parallel
Computing the shadow means loading the
subsequent sample depths, and finding the closest
value within a threshold.
This is very simple computationally, requiring just
two instructions per sample.

Here is a visualization of how wavefronts are
aligned to a projected light coordinate
Close to the light coordinate, some pixels are
written multiple times by overlapping wavefronts.
In practice, this is neither visually noticeable or a
performance concern.
Other than this overlap, the effect is temporally
stable – as it does not rely on dithering or random
sampling.

This one-dimensional mapping has proven very
useful for a range of graphics problems beyond
this technique.
We have successfully used this to accelerate effects
ranging from Cloud Rendering, Terrain Shadowing
to Bloom - and experimentally for techniques like
God Rays and Voxel Light Transport.

Days Gone (PS4) was the first title to use this technique for Sun Light shadows

The ground here is a mostly a flat material

How does this material extract micro shadow detail?

This is done with a technique we internally call “Depth Bias”

And it couldn’t be simpler…

Along side regular material GBuffer exports, such as Normal, Albedo and Roughness

All materials also export a high-frequency displacement term (“Depth Bias”)

This term represents high-frequency surface depth variance of approximately +/- 8cm

This displacement term is stored in 12 bits of the GBuffer

The Depth Texture used during rendering stored Resolved Depth plus this Depth Bias term

This didn’t just affect shadows - from AO to decal blending, snow, puddles and water effects

Any rendering system that reconstructed position from depth gained depth bias effects

Screen Space Shadow:
Compute Shader
Performance
So how much does it cost to generate the shadow?

Setup for a 60 Sample Shadow (shadows are 60
pixels long)
The compiled Compute Shader is less than 300
(200 ALU) instructions unrolled, with 4 image reads
used to perform two manual bilinear samples per
thread.
Breakdown:
~ 120 instructions to read depth values and setup
LDS
~ 150 instructions to read and accumulate samples
- 60 instructions for LDS load/wait
- 60 multiply-add, 30 min3
Average of less than 5 instructions per shadow
sample.

PS5
1440p resolution
60 sample shadow
full-screen
coverage

0.19ms

± 0.01

64 thread wavefront, wave32, with scheduler and occupancy tweaks

Final Thought
Click to add Text

www.bendstudio.com/siggraph
download the code

